okay
loginite is a multi-disciplinary artist
and educator creating art that
interrogates performance extended
reality and physical computing to
question our current forms of
communication they are passionate about
discovering learning and manifest
manifesting and stewarding spaces for
liberated black realities and the black
imagination
lodging believes in making by diving
into navigating critiquing and breaking
systems and technologies that uphold
systemic injustices to decommodify our
bodies undo our indoctrination and make
room for different ways of being
vaginae has had the opportunity to show
and speak about their work at pioneer
works national sawdust leaders in
software and art creative tech week and
art encodes weird reality they were
previously the director of skating at
figure skating in harlem where they
integrated steam and figure skating to
teach girls of color about movement and
technology they have continued their
research on blackness movement and
technology during residencies and
fellowships at the jerome hill art
artist fellowship i beam pioneer works
barbarian group and barnard college um
most um and i'd say most recently the
project that has really been inspiring
me from logini's work is the black
movement library uh one of the works
from that project is currently on view
in our online exhibition diorama which
you can check out at newart.city
www.newark.com without further ado i'm
going to pass it over to lodging
hi my name is elijah mcmillan and i'm a
new media artist and educator creating
art that integrates performance extended
reality and physical computing to
question our current forms of
communication
i am passionate about discovering
learning manifesting and stewarding
spaces for liberated black realities and
the black imagination
i believe in making by diving into
navigating critiquing and breaking
systems and technologies that uphold
systemic injustices to decommodify our
bodies and do our indoctrination and
make rooms for different ways of being
in the past few years access to motion
capture data 3d character-based models
and software to make animation yourself
has skyrocketed from make human to
miximo to carnegie mellon's motion
capture database the ability to make and
finish polished projects has become
easier for many and while these
resources are extremely helpful to
create a range of tools and projects
they lack tools to create diverse
characters and movements unexplored by
systems that center assumptions of
neutrality
and so i began work on the black
movement library which started as an
online database of black motion capture
data and black character-based models
however when i first started this
project i realized that representation
was not enough especially when that
representation enrolled does little to
positively affect the lives of black
folks and our communities
we first need to understand how our
movements and bodies are already
represented in the media and in the
tools we use
it is important for us to be aware of
this in making projects in new digital
spaces that are designed as inherently
and predominantly white spaces
what does it mean to possibly repurpose
or redesign these spaces to effectively
tell and share black stories in ways
that protect and honor us and that are
above all for us
in 2018 losses would file against
fortnite for using dances from mainly
black creators without permission
compensation or credit the millivolt
became swipe it the carlton became the
first effectively erasing the origins of
these dances however currently lawsuits
are unpaused because the dances are not
considered choreography under copyright
law
also when looking for culturally
specific movements in existing motion
capture databases you may find some but
are often met with dances and movements
that don't reflect the search terms also
in the name of making it easy to use
these tools often omit valuable
information from the users including
information about motion capture actors
who provided the movements as well as
important historical and cultural
information about the movements
performed
the common thread of these two examples
is the oversimplification of our people
our stories and our lives and it exists
in a network of systems that commodify
quantify and degrade our humanity in
order to capitalize off of our existence
and being
and so how do we combat the
commodification exploitation erasure and
dilution of black culture in black
people
what do cultural reparations look like
and what does accountability look like
how do we begin the work of holding
these platforms of the past present and
future accountable while fairly
compensating and crediting not only the
individual black people it affects but
the black communities across the
diaspora
how can we discover learn invest in and
steward systems that prioritize
liberation in abundance
[Music]
movement does not only represent our
individual experiences but it also
represents our collective memory
transcending space time and oppressive
social structures it allows us to
connect to each other our ancestors our
deepest selves and gives us space to
communicate to our future
movement is a technology holding the
stories of our existence over the
diaspora
our bodies and movements are more than
data points and avatars they hold our
humanity and it's time for digital
spaces to reflect that and for all
spaces we enter to reflect that
so what does it mean to ethically
digitize black movement how can it
better serve and celebrate the community
how can we effectively challenge digital
tools and landscapes that don't share
these values and gain liberation in our
collective future
the black movement library is a library
for activist performers and artists to
create extended reality projects a space
to research how and why we move
and an archive of black existence
black movement library seeks to grow
community through the use of
performances
reality experiences workshops
conversations and tool making
movement portraits serve as a way to
learn about the lives of the performers
contributing their movement data to the
black movement library what happens when
we visualize the archival process of
data collection and invite the community
in as a witness
using motion capture and unreal engine
performance and their movement data to
be translated into visuals in real time
each experience ranges from five to ten
minutes the first movement portraits
feature maladima ronaldo maurice
ruby gaskins
mafia santana and require will
over the course of development
interviews are recorded with each
performer learning their movement
histories
interviews are then embedded into the
soundscapes that performers here too
allowing the audience to dive into their
lives and learn about how black movement
has been used as a tool of the
preservation of black culture as well as
a vehicle of self-evolution
while movement portraits are real-time
motion capture performance they are also
translated in archives as vr and
single-channel video experiences this
allows movement to be re-represented as
an abstract digital memory of the
performance day
[Music]
understanding transforming and
preserving movement in digital spaces is
a workshop to learn about extended
reality tools in relationship to race
gender and culture
this workshop explores issues of
cultural representation and exploitation
through readings and discussions while
also providing an introduction to motion
capture rigging in 3d environments core
elements of this workshop integrate
performance extended reality and
physical computing to question access
control and representation
in this workshop we dive into a
framework that i've been investigating
researching and developing with others
we go out into the world by working with
different digital technologies
understanding why they work and what
they get wrong we come back to itself by
discovering diving into and developing
our own body technologies i asked
students to enter the space with our
whole selves and that we spend time to
witness another can this intersection of
different fields help us to unravel and
understand how our humanity weaves
through the recordings of our movements
the modeling of our bodies and the 3d
realizations of the worlds we wish to be
in
i ask students to hack the traditional
ways in which we learn and engage with
digital tools by embedding our whole
selves into the process in which we
produce
this workshop depends on in center's
process
what portals of reconnection can we
discover together
conversations bring together black
people from different fields from
different perspectives to dive into
these questions with the community
each conversation is recorded in
archives in the library for the first
conversation i along guest speakers amy
meredith cox yep associate professor of
anthropology and african american
studies along with writer and motion
designer youssef cole came together to
parse all of these questions in
relationship to their own personal
practices and research
recently i also was able to speak with
artists and organizer amara spence about
black
resin library peop a movement it is a
movement that celebrates black history
and black culture it is a movement that
serves our community to learn and grow
as society evolves it is a movement that
holds us accountable in the ways we deal
with black people our movements our
bodies and our lives
thank you
i
produced
[Music]
the root
my whole family is
[Music]
i was 10 years 10 years
and then
the winner
[Music]
i thought
we just started
everybody um i'm live with julia and
elijah nate mcmillan vladimir it's so
amazing to have you here um and you know
this your talk
was so
you said some things that i think people
really need to hear right now um and
that these are issues and ideas
you know related to preparations related
to appropriation that you know are so
crucial as we think about building new
worlds as we think about rewriting the
racist and problematic protocols that
are embedded within our current systems
um and
you know i'm just i'm so thrilled to
have included your voice in in this
conversation
um
you also all mentioned quickly too that
you also have a work in the gray area
um work from the bach movement library
uh project some of the motion capture
performance uh
uh videos um so definitely go check that
out at
www.newart.city um and i'll do a little
bit of sweet share in a few minutes just
give everybody
a little taste
um
but you know login a i you know just to
start us off i'd love to hear
a little bit about what you're working
on now because we've been in contact for
i think just about two years we've known
each other and have you know we've
worked on a couple i've been you know
we've i've worked on your work a couple
of different shows um and i through that
time i've gotten to see uh things in the
black movement library expand and evolve
and i've seen you kind of uh you know
make your mark in you know in the nft
space and in you know other
um other exhibitions there was a really
amazing presentation at the heart at the
brooklyn public library a couple months
ago
so i'd love to hear what you're working
on now and what your current focus is
and kind of uh from that trajectory kind
of where where you're headed
yeah so right now um i'm working on a
performance piece well
it's pretty much in the next phase
from antidote which started as a
video work so
right now we're working with
six students from the lower east side
and manhattan
as well as
three students from
south brooklyn high school and so it's
pretty much like a cross between like
two different high schools and we're
working with them to create um
an immersive liberated reality with them
so it's a performance piece um and it's
it'll be about like an hour long um and
it'll it'll also be um a live motion
capture performance so yeah i i guess
i've been working on just like crosses
between live performance live motion
capture performance
as well as with movement portraits i've
been
um now turning that into
an online um
an online uh web xr experience too um
well a sort of cross between like online
and like downloadable xr experience so
um yeah basically uh with the movement
portraits i was able to um when i did
the brooklyn public library experience
um that was like live outdoors and
essentially what happens is that i now
go through this process of
turning that live performance into
um both the 2d like video experience as
well as a more like um in-depth
um
vr experience too so um
the performance itself gets archived in
that way um
yeah so it sort of like transforms into
something different but also sort of
speaks to um what happened that day um
yeah
yeah all right can you explain
what exactly you mean by xr
and what that look how that how your
work translates to that medium
yeah so
xr stands for extended reality which is
an umbrella term for virtual reality
augmented reality in mixed reality
and so
basically the tool that i use for all of
my visuals is unreal engine which is a
gaming engine
that creates a lot of like different
video games but you can also do
what i love about unreal is that you can
essentially create
all
different various types of projects with
just one engine so i use it for video
artwork like all of the work right now
um because it's made in the engine it
can literally um be transferred into
like a virtual reality experience an
augmented reality experience um
2d video which is like sort of which is
actually what i um am showing in the um
show
you you just get the option to be able
to um
[Music]
make so many different um medias like in
mediums like you get to like sort of
weave in and out of them um with one
tool um which is really really cool
um
so yeah okay thank you
clarity
that's awesome um and i want to like you
know sorry i just i just i'd say i mean
myself said to pause the the new york
city for a second um but yeah here's the
work that i'm showing here and i'm just
going to keep this kind of running in
the background so uh you can get a sense
of the the aesthetic of lagenae's work
while we're while we're chatting um i
want to
go back to this phrase that you just
used uh you know to describe this
performance work um with the with the
students in manhattan um of
i believe you said performance liberated
reality um and you spoke a little bit
about this in your presentation but i
was wondering if you could dig in a
little bit more and kind of help us
understand what that means
and how
we might be able to to achieve it
um yeah so basically my work
it's really interesting i guess because
um
sort of like what i what i spoke about a
little bit in the talk is that these
tools that we're working with are
um
inherently biased so um essentially
that
that in it of itself sort of like i
guess like reflects the the outer world
that we live in um
and sometimes i feel like we always um
uh what's the word like we center the
tools we centered like the digital
platforms that we use
um
in our everyday lives and so what my
work
asks us to do
is to um
still work with these tools
in these platforms but to de-center them
as the
um
only powerful source that there is
um and so i feel like we're living in um
i guess like multiple realities already
like and i would just say like the the
easiest way to sort of explain this is
um you know i would just say like a dual
reality where it's like on one hand
we're living in um
a world that's like super oppressive
there's a lot of different oppressive
systems around us um and as we navigate
and move through those spaces um you
know it's just really hard especially
for
folks who are coming from marginalized
communities so
but then on the other hand i do feel
like there is an inherent liberated
reality
that's also present in our everyday
lives um i am you know a heavy
like a heavy manifesto you know like
someone who deeply and truly believes
that like i can
manifest those reality like i can
manifest like anything that um
i want to see and so um basically
manifesting a liberated reality um in my
work what i sort of um define that as is
basically asking a question of like what
does that look like how does that um
expand as i grow as i learn um how can i
do that with other people how can i do
this work with other people what does it
look like visually
what does it feel like how do i immerse
myself in it
and also it's a it's an understanding
that that reality that that that reality
exists already um that that liberated
reality exists and
we just have to tap into it
and we have to be um
and so like what does it mean to
continuously tap into
to subscribe to um that space to that
reality
and what does it mean to
you know continue building it up to a
point where
um
i can uns subscribe from the
from the oppressive reality because like
at the end of the day you know like
right now we have like we have to like
live in that space and um but really
what i'm hoping for is to inspire folks
to
really
really take into consideration that
we're all world builders and that we're
all world building every day and that
you know yes we live in these systems
now but we also have opportunities to
create and build new systems with each
other
and we don't have to perpetuate those
systems
those oppressive systems on ourselves or
on each other um so it starts like you
know person to person but then it can
grow outwards um to the communities that
we're shaping and that work that we're
living in so
yeah it's like okay um
how do we how do we manifest that how do
we
how do we stay in that um and i guess
like one part of also just like
manifesting is just is really having
this deep knowing this deep
understanding this deep faith that um
whatever it is
that you are manifesting already exists
so
yeah
did that answer you
absolutely absolutely yeah
sometimes i can just like ramble and
stuff
that was all like
so you know just building off of that a
little bit um i wanted to ask um you
know we i've been mentioning the
movement portraits and the movement
library um but i was wondering if you
could expand a little bit more on um you
know how that works and how
that archive is working to
lead us towards that liberated reality
um and because i know that there's such
a strong and vibrant ethic of care
um and consideration and protection that
you know accompanies this project and i
think that that's a
an ethos and a model and a work practice
that
is so valuable and so wholesome um the
whole system is not the right word that
sounds corny i mean not also i mean uh
general generative is maybe a better
word
um
yeah so i guess like for me um
right right now
um
i sort of like flipped the
the archive i guess like on its head
um because when i first started the
project i was like
very much just like oh i need to get
content i need to get content i need to
get like movement i need to get data
but then i wasn't really like thinking
about what that meant and and what that
really what that truly meant and how
that sort of um how even just like that
thought process
of of just thinking in that way um can
also be like dehumanizing in itself it's
like you know these movements are coming
from a person
who is um who has a full life
and so what does it mean to
um
what does it mean to
archive like snippets of people's lives
and people's journeys
um what what does that process look like
and then it sort of like dives into
relationships and and building and
creating relationships with the people
that i work with
um especially as i'm recording their
movements
so like with this first like with the
first two movement portraits which are
in the show um you know i worked with
two
um
two performers who also performed in the
brooklyn public library so sort of
seeing that transition and that change
over time because people change and grow
and and being able to interview them
like two years later two years well now
three years like after the first
performance to sort of see like how
they've
changed and how they've grown over time
is like really really um special to me
and also i'd realize too that there is
like
being like a technologist but also being
like a mover myself
um there's been
i had realized that there is there's a
there's sometimes this like really um
toxic like relationship between like
technologists and and um the the the
people that they work with like the
dancers that they work with or the
performers that they work with it's it's
very much like a it's very like
disconnected sometimes because i feel
like for technologists it's just like
what can i do like how can i make this
thing and it's very like you you're just
like a subject or an object in my piece
like you know and it's very like that
process is also dehumanizing it's like
okay like how do you sort of take a step
like you know you know get knocked down
a few pegs and like be human yourself
like um
and then also realize that you're
co-creating with the people that you're
working with so it's like i'm not doing
this by myself i'm not being like a um
i'm not like
uh i guess like like i'm allowing people
to be who they are
and i am um sort of recording that i'm
witnessing that you know and i am
creating representations of that
um
but we're more like collaborators rather
than just me
like doing everything and you know the
people being like little
i guess like specs of data like you know
these like sort of data fied or
quantified um elements um and i think
like that sort of like goes into this
process of like
you know
decommodification because i feel like
um
sometimes
these relationships that we have with
performers can be very um
just very like what's the word it's like
it's like just ill like not even just
like with technologists like in a lot of
different ways in a lot of different
spaces i feel like performers are just
taken advantage of so it's like okay
like this is really speaking to that
it's like okay like how can i do this in
a way where i'm caring about people
which is like
it's so sad that that's like
um radical
it's like
oh my gosh i mean i totally feel that
though you know it seems like you know
in you know we've been talking a lot
this weekend out about you know the
recent news of facebook and the
whistleblowers and you know all of the
horrible things that have been allowed
to come to pass that were more known
about
um and it does feel radical to you know
embed care into something and you know
that kind of leads me to my next
question because i really wanted to ask
you know
obviously we're in a society and we're
constricted by technological systems
that are particularly extractive and
exploitative of black people and of
people of color um and so i would love
you know to you know from your
perspective as a technologist as a mover
yourself as a figure skater and a dancer
and so many other things um what sorts
of protocols do you want to see written
or how would you rewrite
those
systems in order to suit you to suit
your community and to suit the ideals
and the morals that you you hold dear
yeah so that's a really like
um that's a heavy one i feel like right
now
what i've been really focused on in my
work is this idea of
um
or this term that was coined in one of
my workshops
um
called embodied metadata
so basically embodied metadata is like
the data about the data that our bodies
like produce
that sort of like show the fullness of
our lives um and essentially with that
um
it's like this realization that our body
itself is a technology
um
and it holds like so many various
different technologies
in ways that we communicate and connect
with each other so what does it mean to
like recenter the body um to recenter
our bodies and how we connect with one
another and how can we use that as a way
to sort of navigate and hack and
critique the digital tools and spaces
that we enter
and move through um
so yeah so it's like a re-centering of
the self
um
together
in a way and and and pushing that
forward and saying that like even though
these tools exist
um
i exist too
and
also you know i'm here because of
you know
my ancestors journeys um
and
that lineage and they have left for me
um
just a wealth of knowledge and tools and
and space to
to really make and create and think and
um and dream
so
so yeah like um
trying to like
find out and understand what those
ancestral technologies are too
um trying to live in those spaces
because i also feel like
the tools exist like we just have to
like
use them and tap into them like we just
need to like
know
know them
yeah yeah and find them and um discover
them and and understand them
and learn them but it's hard because you
know
time it's like you know we're living in
like a capitalist society and it's like
you know
one of the things that
is hard to sort of navigate is is
actually being able to have the time to
take the time to
learn and use those tools because
it's going to be a little bit harder and
a little bit it's going to take more
time to do that you know and not
everyone has that time and especially
like for folks who
like the thing is like you know time is
money right like whatever but so it's
like you know you don't if you don't
have money if you don't have the money
to do it then it's like it's hard it's
harder to actually do that thing
so for me it was just like okay like
when i did well now i'm starting to get
some money but like before it was like
even when i didn't have money i was just
like well you know
i'm just going to do it anyway i'm just
going to be broke
figure it out
i mean like i mean it wasn't like a good
i mean it was a good move but like it
because like now i can start to see like
oh like this is all starting to work out
for me now but
i was just like oh shoot like this is
this is hard like this it was not a mood
for a while so
it was
i mean yeah it's so hard i mean even
just like the cost of a motion capture
suit is like so prohibitively expensive
it's not something that the average
person can just walk up in and use um
but you know in the you know you were
talking about time logining and i know
that you have to go
um and they were a little bit over
but i appreciate you being here so much
and there are some more questions from
the audience that we didn't get to
answer there are questions about the
copywriting of choreography the
copywriting of motion capture files um
and whether that's a a viable mechanism
for um you know supporting black dancers
black creators um helping them to gain
sovereignty over their work we don't
have a ton of time to talk about this
but everybody head to twitter
i'll start some threads maybe we can get
a little conversation going there um and
discuss some of the possibilities and
pathways that are are available thank
you so much logjanae
thank you thanks for having me
good to see you thank you so much